Xref: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu alt.activism:42373 alt.conspiracy:21374 talk.politics.misc:176866 misc.legal:59957
Newsgroups: alt.activism,alt.conspiracy,talk.politics.misc,misc.legal
Path: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu!rochester!udel!gatech!howland.reston.ans.net!usc!cs.utexas.edu!utnut!torn!watserv2.uwaterloo.ca!watserv1!mks.com!richw
From: richw@mks.com (Rich Wales)
Subject: Sick and tired (was Re: Bill Conklin (et al) 's letter)
Message-ID: <1993Apr4.054843.22307@mks.com>
Reply-To: richw@mks.com (Rich Wales)
Organization: Mortice Kern Systems Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, CANADA
References: <1993Apr3.223215.20655@colorado.edu>
Distribution: na
Date: Sun, 4 Apr 1993 05:48:43 GMT
Lines: 92

Replying to A.J. Teel:

	Well, the two nifty letters giving concrete proof that the
	Income Tax is voluntary and giving specific procedures for
	stopping withholding, et cetera have been out there for a
	while now.

Humbug.  Those letters don't provide "concrete proof" of anything at all
in the absence of any case law that demonstrates the method will actu-
ally work for ordinary people in everyday situations.

Specifically, show us some case law in which the courts have ruled that
income tax is illegal and/or that ordinary working types do not have to
pay income tax (and that they can legally avoid paying income tax with-
out declaring themselves to be churches or some such silliness).  This
issue is sufficiently important that I think we have a right to expect
something squarely on point from the US Supreme Court (in the case of
federal tax) or a state's supreme court (for a state's income tax).

Unless you can do that, I for one am unwilling to call your material
"concrete proof".

	There has been no refutation to date.  Have the nay-sayers
	finally given up as defeated?  Sure would like to hear their
	reasons for disbelief at this point.

Refutation??  Refutation of what?  You haven't made a case yet.  You've
posted plenty of claims, but you haven't given us any valid reason to
believe that any court in the US will agree with you.  Your claims seem
on the surface to deviate so radically from the legal mainstream that I
feel the burden of proof is still on =you= to show that your arguments
have any merit whatsoever.  And the cases you've cited involve such
strange situations that I see no reason to assume that the rulings are
applicable to anyone else, or that they will ultimately stand on appeal
to the Supreme Court.

Why can't you just cite us a case in which Joe Schmoe, a regular
employee earning regular wages from a regular company, refuses to pay
his income tax, gets hauled into court, is convicted of wilful tax eva-
sion, and then has his conviction overturned by the US Supreme Court
with a landmark 7-2 majority ruling that income tax is indeed totally
voluntary?  What, you say?  No such case exists?  Hmmm, I wonder why
not; why haven't you?

	Shall I conclude that the point has been received and the
	opposition has forfeited the field?

With all due respect, you can conclude anything you want.  I just hope,
for your own sake, that you don't conclude that anyone in a position of
authority in the United States or any legitimate or illegitimate polit-
ical subdivision thereof is going to agree with your conclusions.

For that matter, I confess I'm thoroughly confused as to =why= you would
be looking for court rulings in your favor anyway -- since I thought you
told us earlier that every court in the US has been in cahoots with big
banking interests since the 1938 "admiralty jurisdiction" coverup thing.
Do you honestly expect us to believe that they'd go to all the trouble
to subvert the system, and yet would still promptly slink back into
their burrows in the face of anyone who knew enough to invoke the right
combination of magic spells and mystic mumbo-jumbo?

Not only that, but why do you even =care= what the US courts say anyway?
Didn't you tell us a while back that you've disavowed all attempts by US
officials to classify you as a "14th Amendment federal citizen"?  When
the FBI comes to haul you away for tax evasion, why don't you just tell
them they're out of their jurisdiction and should go back to Washington,
D.C., where they belong?

Or maybe we should all just go back to mediaeval common law, which you
suggested would be better than all these statutes, codes, and the like.
If you want to renounce society's legal framework, fine; we can just
declare you an outlaw, OK?, and anyone who sees you driving on the roads
with no license plate on your car and no driver's license in your wallet
can just take you like a game animal and stew you for their supper (with
plenty of veggies and a pinch of salt, but WITHOUT PREJUDICE UCC 1-207).

Sorry, everyone, it's getting late, and I'm sick and tired of all this
garbage.  If I know what's good for me, I'll just clam up and stop try-
ing to refute this nonsense, and if anyone falls for it and winds up in
jail for tax evasion or what-not, it'll be on their own head.

Needless to say, none of the above represents the opinions of my current
employer -- who, in any case, is a Canadian and doesn't really need to
care too much about US tax law.  I, on the other hand, am a "14th Amend-
ment federal citizen", with a US passport to prove it, and plan to keep
on filing Form 1040's for the foreseeable future (though I will probably
not owe any US income tax due to the foreign earned income exclusion
and/or the foreign tax credit).

-- 
Rich Wales <richw@mks.com>       //      Mortice Kern Systems Inc. (MKS)
35 King St. N. // Waterloo, Ontario, Canada N2J 2W9 // +1 (519) 884-2251
