Path: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu!crabapple.srv.cs.cmu.edu!fs7.ece.cmu.edu!europa.eng.gtefsd.com!gatech!swrinde!elroy.jpl.nasa.gov!ames!saimiri.primate.wisc.edu!zazen!uwec.edu!mcelwre
From: mcelwre@cnsvax.uwec.edu
Newsgroups: talk.politics.misc
Subject: SECRET PURPOSE OF FALKLANDS WAR
Message-ID: <1993Apr5.193243.5677@cnsvax.uwec.edu>
Date: 5 Apr 93 19:32:43 -0600
Organization: University of Wisconsin Eau Claire
Lines: 918



SECRET PURPOSE OF FALKLANDS WAR;  [with IN-VISIBILITY Technology]

Dr. Beter AUDIO LETTER #74 of 80

Digitized by Jon Volkoff, mail address eidetics@cerf.net

"AUDIO LETTER(R)" is a registered trademark of Audio Books,
Inc., a Texas corporation, which originally produced this tape
recording.  Reproduced under open license granted by Audio
Books, Inc.

-----------------------------------------------------------------

This is the Dr. Beter AUDIO LETTER(R), 1629 K St. NW, Washington,
DC  20006.

   Hello, my friends, this is Dr. Beter.  Today is April 30,
1982, and this is my AUDIO LETTER(R) No. 74.

  It's now been almost one month since war broke out in the South
Atlantic.  On the surface it seems that it's only a dispute
between Argentina and Great Britain over the barren, wind-swept
Falkland Islands and South Georgia Island.  In reality, it's far
more than that.

   The so-called Falklands crisis is just the visible tip of a
giant military operation.  During this month of April 1982,
fierce naval battles have taken place--not only in the South
Atlantic but also in the South Pacific.  Up to now most of the
hostilities have been kept under wraps by wartime censorship on
all sides.  But as I say these words, the naval war in the
Southern Hemisphere is about to come to the surface.

   Beginning today, April 30, a total naval and air blockade of
the Falklands by the Royal Navy has begun.  At the same time a
counterblockade has been declared by Argentina in the same area.

   To be effective, a blockade must be imposed over a period of
time, but the Royal Navy does not have that much time.  Winter is
coming on in the South Atlantic, and the British supply lines are
overextended.  Having come this far, Her Majesty's navy cannot
simply drop the blockade and sail away in a few weeks time
without drawing blood from Argentina.  As a result the British
will be forced to undertake military operations very soon no
matter how risky they may be.

   There is also another reason why the Royal Navy now has no
choice but to engage the Argentine forces in combat.  That
reason, my friends, is that the Royal Navy has already suffered
losses in secret combat this month.  Up to this moment there will
be no way to explain away the damage which has been sustained by
the British fleet.  Only when publicly admitted fighting erupts
will the British dare to admit that they have suffered battle
losses.  To obtain that cover story, the British have no choice
but to sail into combat; but in doing so, they will be risking
even heavier losses on top of those already sustained.  In short,
my friends, Her Majesty's navy has sailed into a trap.

   The events now unfolding in the South Atlantic carry strange,
ironic echoes of the past.  For weeks now we've been hearing
countless commentators referring to the British task force as an
"armada" (quote).  The British of all people ought to be very
uneasy with that description.  The original Spanish Armada 400
years ago was renowned as a seemingly invincible fighting force,
but it came to grief in a naval disaster so complete that it
changed the course of history--and it was none other than the
English navy that destroyed the Spanish Armada.

   The original Spanish Armada put to sea in 1588 during the
reign of England's Queen Elizabeth I.  The Armada was an invasion
fleet carrying thousands of crack fighting men to invade England. 
They were met by the daring sea dogs of Sir Francis Drake.  Drake
and his small, fast ships turned the tables on the Spanish Armada
by changing the rules of battle.  The English fleet was equipped
with new longer-range guns, and it stayed upwind and out of
reach.  From there the English pounded, smashed, and shattered
the big ships of the mighty Armada.  When it was all over, barely
half the Spanish fleet was left to limp back to port.  Drake's
defeat of the Spanish Armada was a shock to the world.  It opened
the door for England under Queen Elizabeth I to start its
expansion into a truly global empire.

   Today, 400 years later, history seems to have come full
circle.  Queen Elizabeth II is witnessing the dismantling of the
world empire whose heyday began under Queen Elizabeth I, and now
the cultures of England and of Spain are once again in
confrontation.  Once again a so-called armada is preparing for
invasion, but this time the armada is British, not Spanish.  Four
hundred years ago Sir Francis Drake was the hero of the day;
today, the ghost of Francis Drake is once again on the scene.

   The South Atlantic war zone is at the eastern end of the Drake
Passage around the southern tip of South America.  The defeat of
the Spanish Armada four centuries ago broke the back of Spain's
naval supremacy, and now the defeat of the new British armada may
well break the back of what remains of the once glorious Royal
Navy.

   My three special topics for this AUDIO LETTER are:

Topic #1--THE MILITARY SECRET OF SOUTH GEORGIA ISLAND
Topic #2--THE SECRET NAVAL WAR OF THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE
Topic #3--THE ROCKEFELLER FEAR CAMPAIGN AGAINST NUCLEAR WAR.

Topic #1--When the Falkland Islands crisis began early this month
it looked at first like a tempest in a teapot.  For a century and
a half since 1833, the Islands have been controlled by Great
Britain.  During that entire time, British sovereignty over the
Falklands has been disputed by Argentina.  There have been
countless threats by Argentina to seize the Islands, which it
calls the Malvinas, but the threats have always come to nothing
in the past and Britain has never even gotten very worried about
them.

   The Islands are four times as distant from Argentina as Cuba
is from the United States, and they are not much of a prize. 
After 150 years of occupancy, the Falklands are home to fewer
than 2,000 British settlers and a lot of sheep.  In short, the
remote Falkland Islands hardly look like something to fight over,
and yet here we are watching another crisis take place.  We are
watching as war erupts between Great Britain and Argentina.

   The Thatcher government is acting as if it has forgotten all
about its usual preoccupation with the Soviet threat at NATO's
doorstep.  Instead, Britain is throwing almost everything it's
got at Argentina---aircraft carriers, cruisers, destroyers,
submarines, assault ships--you name it.  Luxury cruise ships have
even been commissioned and turned into troop carriers overnight. 
Wave after wave of additional assault troops have been activated
and sent to join the fleet even after it sailed.  Ships and
submarines have been pulled off station from normal NATO duty and
sent to reinforce the task force.  The initial 40-ship force has
grown steadily over the past several weeks into an armada
numbering over 70.  Over two-thirds of the entire Royal Navy has
already been deployed to the South Atlantic off Argentina.

   Watching all this, a lot of people are asking: What's this
fight really all about?  The most popular answer suggested in the
major media is "oil."  Vast deposits of oil are known to exist
under the continental shelf between Argentina and the Falklands,
but that has been known for nearly 10 years.  In no way does it
explain the timing of the sudden military offensive by Argentina
this month, and oil explains even less about the Argentine
seizure of South Georgia Island.

   South Georgia Island is 800 miles east of the Falklands with
no known oil deposits anywhere near it; and compared to South
Georgia, the Falklands are an island paradise.  South Georgia
Island is covered with rugged mountains, treacherous valleys,
glaciers, and semi-permanent snow.  Most of it is uninhabitable. 
On top of all that, Argentina has absolutely no legal or
historical claim to South Georgia Island.  In that respect it
stands in sharp contrast to the Falklands.

   In the early 1830s the Falklands were occupied for a while by
Argentine colonists.  In 1833 the British expelled them and took
over the Island.  For that and other historical reasons,
Argentina argues that the Falklands really belong to Argentina,
not Britain.

   But no such argument is possible for South Georgia Island.  It
has always been controlled by Britain, never by Argentina or
Spain.  The Argentine seizure of South Georgia Island looks even
more unreasonable from a military point of view.  Argentina's
leaders are military men and they think in military terms.  They
were well aware ahead of time that far-off South Georgia Island
could not possibly be held for long.  By seizing it they were
setting themselves up to absorb a military defeat, as the Island
was retaken by Britain.  So the question is: Why did Argentina's
military junta bother with the seemingly worthless South Georgia
Island at all?

   My friends, the answers to all these questions are military,
not political or economic.  South Georgia Island possesses an
enormous military secret.  It's a giant underground installation
buried under the mountains at the northwest end of the Island. 
The real reason for the so-called Falkland crisis is this secret
installation, together with two other similar installations which
I will describe shortly.

   The secret military complexes have been in existence for many
years; they are not new.  What is new is the accelerated nuclear
war timetable of the American Bolshevik war planners here in
Washington.  For the past two months I've been reporting the
details of this new war plan to you as quickly as I can obtain
and verify them.

   The plan calls for NUCLEAR WAR ONE to erupt by September of
this year 1982!!  It is this fast-approaching nuclear war threat
that caused the so-called Falklands crisis to erupt now.

   What is going on now is a coordinated effort to spoil part of
the Bolshevik grand strategy for the coming nuclear war.  The
mutual enemies of the American Bolsheviks here--namely, the
Rockefeller cartel--and Russia's new rulers in the Kremlin are
behind the present crisis.  They are trying to ruin Phase #3 of
the "PROJECT Z" war plan which I revealed last month.  That phase
is to be world domination by the American Bolsheviks after both
Russia and the United States have been destroyed in NUCLEAR WAR
ONE.  As I mentioned last month, the key to this plan is the
existence of secret weapons stockpiles in various places around
the world.

   The American Bolshevik military planners here in America are
working with other Bolshevik agents in key military positions of
other countries to set off war.  Having done that, they intend to
ride out the nuclear holocaust they have caused, safe and cozy in
Government war bunkers!  When the warring nations finally lie
smoldering and exhausted, the Bolsheviks will leave the shattered
remains of their host countries.  They will rendezvous at the
secret weapons installations and bring their weapons into the
open.  They will confront the world with the only remaining
fresh, up-to-date, powerful military force on earth; and using
that military power, they will become the undisputed rulers of
the world--that is, they plan to do all this, and they plan to
pave the way for world domination very soon by setting off
NUCLEAR WAR ONE in a matter of months.  The Rockefeller cartel
and Russia's new anti-Bolshevik rulers are working together in a
race against time to try to head off the Bolshevik war plan.

   Last month I mentioned that the Bolsheviks here are
benefitting from war preparations which were started by the
Rockefellers long ago.  It has only been about three years since
the Rockefellers were dislodged as the prime movers of the United
States Government by the Bolsheviks.  Since that time the United
States Government has been a house divided, torn by internal
power struggles between rival Bolshevik and Rockefeller factions. 
But before that, the United States had been dominated for decades
both economically and politically by the Four Rockefeller
Brothers.

   In 1961 the Brothers launched a new long-range plan for world
domination.  It was a two-prong strategy, half visible and half
secret, which I first described long ago in AUDIO LETTER No. 28. 
It was a plan for the United States to arm to the teeth in secret
while appearing to disarm gradually.  Without repeating all the
details, the basic idea was grandiose yet simple.  By
deliberately appearing weak, the Rockefeller-controlled United
States would maneuver itself into a nuclear war with Russia. 
Then the secret weapons, including superweapons, would be
unleashed to smash Russia and take over the world.

   When they set the grand plan in motion in 1961, the
Rockefeller Brothers were looking ahead to a nuclear war by the
late 1970s.  Their military analysts concluded very early that
the war being planned would have very different effects on the
Northern and Southern Hemispheres.  Both superpowers, the United
States and the Soviet Union, are located well up in the Northern
Hemisphere; so are the other full-fledged nuclear powers--Great
Britain, France, Red China, and India.  By contrast, the
strategic targets for nuclear war in the Southern Hemisphere are
relatively few and far between.  In other words, it was expected
that the coming nuclear war would be essentially a Northern
Hemisphere war.

   In an all-out nuclear holocaust it is known that serious
radioactive fallout will gradually spread to affect even areas
not initially hit by war.  But there are limits to how far the
war clouds can spread.  It was discovered long ago that there is
very little mixing between the air of the Northern and Southern
Hemispheres.  In the northern half of our planet, cold air from
the North Pole works its way southward towards the equator, then
it works its way back to the north as warm air.  A mirror image
of this process takes up the southern half of the planet. 
Northern and Southern Hemisphere air meet in the equatorial zone,
but very little of the air changes places.

   The military conclusion, my friends, is this: the coming
nuclear war could ruin large areas of the Northern Hemisphere for
generations to come; but if the calculations are right, the
Southern Hemisphere could escape virtually unaffected by the war. 
This was music to the ears of the Four Rockefeller Brothers.  A
quick look at the globe of the world shows why.  The Rockefeller
cartel has dominated Latin America ever since World War II.  As I
discussed in my very first monthly AUDIO LETTER, Nelson
Rockefeller solidified the cartel grip on Latin America during
the war.  He accomplished this as so-called "Coordinator of
Hemispheric Defense" for then-President Franklin D. Roosevelt. 
So that takes care of the South American continent and its
natural resources.

   Then there is the African continent.  There, too, Rockefeller
control was already in effect over wide areas of Black Africa,
especially south of the equator.  All this was thanks to the
efforts of John D. Rockefeller III, as I detailed in AUDIO LETTER
No. 36.

   Looking around the globe, the most important remaining land
masses from the standpoint of world domination are Australia and
New Zealand.  Thanks to World War II, both were wide open to the
Rockefellers.

   The Rockefeller Brothers decided to establish secret military
installations in the Southern Hemisphere for use after the coming
war.  By this means they expected to become the masters of the
surviving southern half of planet Earth after the Northern
Hemisphere war.  Then, as the Northern Hemisphere gradually
recovered from the nuclear holocaust, the Rockefeller empire
would be able to pick up the pieces.  In this way the third
generation Rockefeller Brothers expected their family dynasty to
inherit the Earth.

   In order to control the Southern Hemisphere militarily after
the war, some means would have to be available to project
military power onto any land mass.  For example, revolts against
Rockefeller domination would require troops--not a blast from the
beam weapons on the Moon.  The most critical factor for postwar
military domination of the world was found to be a navy.  A
minimum of two secret naval fleets would be required--one based
in the South Atlantic, the other in the South Pacific.  Since the
reserve naval fleets were to be kept secret until after the
Northern Hemisphere nuclear war, they could not be built in
existing shipyards.  New construction facilities had to be built
and they had to be hidden.  To hide an entire shipyard is no
small task; they take up a lot of space.  On top of that, it was
essential that the ships remain hidden after they were built. 
The best way to achieve that was to combine the shipyard and
naval base into one over-all secret installation.  Finally, the
secret naval installation had to be invulnerable to nuclear
attack; otherwise if its existence were ever discovered
prematurely, the secret navy might be wiped out.

   The combined requirements for secrecy, space, and protection
against attack were formidable; but one day in 1959, while all
these plans were still in the early stages of development, the
answer presented itself.  During a so-called banking trip to
Sweden, David Rockefeller was given a tour of a unique hidden
naval port.  The port is hollowed out from solid granite cliffs
which come right down to the water.  The entrance to the port is
a gigantic hole in the side of the cliff which can be sealed off
with enormous steel doors.  Inside this big doorway on the water
a huge cavity has been hollowed out to accommodate ships.

   The Rockefeller Brothers and their military adviser decided
that a bigger, more secret, better protected version of the
Swedish hidden port was just what they wanted.  A survey of
candidate sites was then initiated.  The site survey covered
coastal areas throughout the Southern Hemisphere.  Many areas
were rejected very quickly because the topography was wrong. 
Other areas were rejected because they were too close to the
equator.  Still others had to be ruled out because there were too
many people living nearby, making the desired level of secrecy
impossible.  Finally, it was essential that the sites chosen for
the secret naval installations be totally secure politically.

   At last the sites for the secret naval installations were
selected.  In the South Pacific, extreme southern New Zealand was
selected.  This is what I was alluding to in AUDIO LETTER No. 71
three months ago when I called attention to New Zealand's extreme
importance in the coming war.

   In order to obtain the necessary space, the secret New Zealand
naval installation had to be divided up into two sites located
close together.  One is at the extreme southwest tip of South
Island where the mountain range known as the Southern Alps comes
down virtually to the water's edge.  The other part of the
installation is built into the northwest tip of Stewart Island,
which is off the tip of South Island.  The Stewart Island
facility is hollowed out within a rise known as Mt. Anglem.

   The New Zealand location met all the requirements.  Ever since
World War II the government of New Zealand has been tied even
closer to the United States than to Great Britain.  The location
is far from the equator, and the installations are buried deep
under mountains, protected from nuclear attack.  They are also
too deep to be reached by particle-beam attacks, and the New
Zealand site is well situated to command the entire South
Pacific.

   In the South Atlantic an even more perfect site was found. 
That site, my friends, is South Georgia Island.  It is located
perfectly for naval domination of the entire South Atlantic.  The
tall, rugged mountains provided a perfect location for the secret
installation at the northwest tip of the 100-mile long island. 
It is controlled by Great Britain whose government, like that of
New Zealand, was willing to cooperate; and South Georgia Island
was virtually uninhabited except for a whaling station on the
northeast coast.  The whaling station was some 50 miles away from
the secret new installation which was being built, but Britain
took no chances.  In 1965 the whaling station was closed down. 
Since that time there have been no inhabitants on South Georgia
Island except for a few dozen alleged Antarctic scientists.

   Construction of the secret naval facilities--two in New
Zealand, one on South Georgia Island--began in the early 1960's. 
The techniques were adapted from those used previously to build
other large underground facilities, such as the NORAD
installation inside Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado; however these
techniques were adapted in radically new ways to achieve
construction access directly from the sea instead of overland. 
In this way, the sheltering mountain was left undisturbed in
appearance both during and after construction.

   The cuts in the mountain side which were necessary to let
ships in and out were kept as small as possible and were well
camouflaged.  Like the Swedish hidden naval port arrangement, the
entrances to the secret installations can be sealed up.  When
sealed, the entrance is virtually impossible to detect unless you
know exactly where it is; and unlike most large construction
projects, there are no tailings or piles of leftover rock lying
around to attract attention.  The man-made caverns which house
the secret naval installations are enormous, but all the rock and
debris was disposed of at sea.

   Once the secret naval facilities were built, they had to be
outfitted for ship construction and docksite storage.  The fake
disarmament of the United States during the 1960s contributed
greatly to this task.  From 1961 to 1968 one man played a pivotal
role in this elaborate Rockefeller scheme.  He was then-Secretary
of Defense Robert McNamara.  All through the 60's McNamara
presided over the public paring back of America's visible
military power.  This included the closing down and dismantling
of entire shipyards.  What we were not told was where all that
shipyard equipment went afterwards.  Where it went, my friends,
was to the new secret installations which were being outfitted in
New Zealand and South Georgia Island!

   The secret naval installations have been used as duplication
facilities to reproduce certain ships and submarines designed and
built here in the United States.  As Defense Secretary Caspar
Weinberger told Congress recently, it is cheaper to build two
ships at a time.  That is especially true if the second ship is
an exact duplicate of the first.  This has become even more true
in recent years through the use of computerized manufacturing
techniques.

   The secret naval fleets which have been built at the secret
installations are made up of duplicates--exact duplicates of
certain other ships and submarines.  They are all nuclear
powered--nuclear "subs"; nuclear cruisers; nuclear destroyers;
and yes, nuclear aircraft carriers, three of them.  A secret twin
was built for the U.S.S. Nimitz, for the U.S.S. Eisenhower, and
for the newly-launched U.S.S. Carl Vincent.  All have been
financed through the gigantic cost overruns, so called, that we
constantly hear about in the Defense Department; and all three
carriers have been provided with a full complement of aircraft
whose manufacture was financed the same way!

   The ships of the secret American Bolshevik naval fleets are
all duplicates of other nuclear-powered vessels.  Even so, the
secret naval ships possess one key difference.

   Last month I revealed that the so-called "Stealth Program" has
succeeded in developing a kind of electromagnetic invisibility
shield.  This technique makes an object invisible from a distance
by distorting light waves in its vicinity.

   A whole new fleet of Phantom war-planes are now going into
crash production that use this principle; and, my friends, all of
the secret American Bolshevik navy ships have already been
outfitted with similar Stealth-field equipment!  The Stealth
principle is actually easier to apply to ships than to airplanes
because there is more room for the powerful equipment that
generates the field.

   After NUCLEAR WAR ONE, the secret Stealth navy of the American
Bolsheviks would be light years ahead of any other navy left on
earth.  It would be perfect for the intended role of world
domination.  The Rockefellers set it all in motion long ago, my
friends, but three years ago they lost control of the United
States Military.  Now it's the American Bolsheviks who are in
control, and they are bent on war.

   These secret naval installations have precipitated what is
being called the "Falklands crisis."

Topic #2--In AUDIO LETTER(R) No. 73 last month I described
"PROJECT Z", the new Bolshevik three-phase strategy for NUCLEAR
WAR ONE.

   An elite group of American Bolshevik military planners here
are flushing out the plan right now at a secret war-room here in
Washington.  It's a plan by which the United States will strike
the first nuclear blow, followed by all-out thermonuclear war
with Russia.

   Having set off the holocaust, the Bolsheviks here and in
certain other countries plan to rise it out safe in comfortable
war bunkers.  Finally after NUCLEAR WAR ONE fizzles out in
stalemate, they plan to leave behind the ashes of the United
States and her allies.  Activating Phase #3 of their grand
strategy, they plan to unveil their secret weapons, especially
their secret naval fleets.  With these they plan to conquer and
rule what is left of the world.  The United States as we know it
will be dead and gone; but in the eyes of the Bolsheviks
themselves, this outcome will constitute victory.

   Up to now the nuclear war timetable which I first revealed two
months ago is still on track.  They are still shooting for
nuclear war to begin by September of this year 1982!  Time is
fast running out.

   The Bolsheviks here are sprinting as fast as they can toward
war; but, my friends, the Bolsheviks are not the only runners in
this race.  They have two deadly enemies, both of whom are
equally determined to trip up the Bolsheviks.  One enemy of the
Bolsheviks here is the Rockefeller cartel; the other enemy is the
new anti-Bolshevik ruling clique in Russia; and now these two
mutual enemies of the Bolsheviks are pooling their efforts in
certain ways.

   In AUDIO LETTER No. 71 three months ago I reported that a
limited, new anti-Bolshevik coalition was in the works between
the Rockefeller cartel and the Russians.  The January 26 meeting
between Haig and Gromyko in Geneva, Switzerland, was a turning
point in the formation of this coalition.  It is now a reality,
and is responsible for the so-called "Falkland crisis" now
dominating the headlines.  It should be emphasized that this new
relationship between the Rockefeller cartel and Russia falls far
short of a true alliance.  They have very major disputes to be
settled between them, but for the time being they have called a
truce between themselves to deal with their mutual deadly
enemy--the Bolsheviks here in America.

   The first priority of the Russians and the Rockefellers is to
slow down the Bolshevik preparations for imminent nuclear war. 
If they can do that, time is on the side of the Rockefeller
cartel in certain political movements which I discussed last
summer in AUDIO LETTER No. 67.  A slow-down in the nuclear war
timetable will also give more breathing space for additional
anti-Bolshevik actions to be implemented.

   The joint Rockefeller-Russian planners decided by mid-February
that military action against the Bolsheviks was essential very
quickly.  No other type of action had any hope of taking effect
fast enough to prevent nuclear war by the end of this summer.

   The exact details of the "PROJECT Z" war plan are not known to
either the Rockefellers or the Russians, but the general outlines
are known to be as I described last month.

   It was decided that military action should be devised that
would undermine Phase #3 of the Bolshevik war plan--that is, the
Bolshevik-controlled secret naval installations and fleets in the
Southern Hemisphere should be attacked and crippled.  By working
together, the Rockefeller cartel and the Russians were able to
devise an attack plan which neither could have carried out alone. 
The Rockefeller group, who built and originally controlled these
bases, provided detailed Intelligence about the best way to
attack them.  The Russians with their enormous military machine
provided the muscle to actually carry out the attack.

   It was essential to devise a scheme that would enable both
secret fleets in the South Atlantic and South Pacific to be
attacked.  Survival intact of either fleet would leave the
Bolshevik war plan still workable.

   Military analysts concluded very quickly that a direct assault
on the New Zealand facilities was out of the question.  There was
no combination of commandos, frogmen, or other military force
which could possibly keep an attack secret from the outside
world.  Any attack on the New Zealand bases would set off the
very war which the Rockefellers and Russians want to prevent.

   But the situation in the South Atlantic was a different
matter.  In a way, the greatest asset of South Georgia Island was
also its Achilles' heel.  The extreme isolation which protected
the secrecy of the South Georgia base also made a covert military
assault feasible.  The key lay with Argentina and her
long-standing claims to the Falkland Islands.

   As I mentioned in Topic #1, the Rockefeller cartel has
dominated all of Latin America for decades.  Cartel operatives
were sent to Argentina to work out a deal with the government
military junta there.  The historic dispute over the Falkland
Islands was to be used to provide a ruse, a military cover, to
enable the South Georgia base to be attacked.  The Argentine
generals were not told everything about the situation by any
means, but they were told enough to make clear what they were to
do.

   As an inducement to cooperate, the Argentine leaders were
promised handsome rewards.  They were guaranteed that after the
shooting was over, the Falkland Islands would remain in Argentine
hands.  This guarantee included the promise of covert military
assistance as needed against the Royal Navy.  And to bolster the
troubled Argentine economy, it was promised that the Rockefeller
cartel will help develop the immense offshore oil reserves.  With
these combined promises of military glory and financial rewards,
the Argentine military junta agreed to the plan.

   On March 19 Argentina carried out Act #1 in the joint attack
plan.  A group of Argentine scrap-metal merchants, of all things,
landed at the abandoned old whaling station on South Georgia
Island.  Supposedly they were there to dismantle the old
buildings and cart them off to sell.  While they were at it they
also raised the Argentine flag over the work-site.  The British,
always nervous about South Georgia Island, promptly reacted as
expected.  The British Antarctic survey ship "Endurance" put 22
Marines ashore.  They drove off the scrap merchants and tore down
the Argentine flag.

   The incident provided the desired excuse for the Argentine
Junta to bring the simmering 150-year-old Falklands dispute to a
boil.  From time to time in the past, Argentina has claimed that
South Georgia is part of the Falklands because it is administered
that way by Britain.  That argument is very flimsy but it now
came in very handy.  It was nothing new to hear this from
Argentine leaders, so there was no hint of what was really afoot.

   During late March, Argentine military forces started
assembling for an assault on the Falklands.  "Nothing new",
thought the British high command.  Argentina has carried out
threatening maneuvers in the past many times.  It was believed
that they were about to do it again; but on April 2 Argentine
forces did the unexpected.  After many past false alarms, this
time they actually invaded and seized the Islands.  All Argentine
public statements emphasized the long-standing historical claims
to the Falklands themselves; but just for good measure, the next
day a small Argentine force also seized far-off South Georgia
Island.  The force was so small that it gave the appearance
initially that it was just a side show from Argentina's point of
view; however, the small contingent of 22 Royal Marines were
overpowered and bundled off the Island along with a group of 13
alleged scientists.  That was the moment of payoff in the joint
Rockefeller-Russian attack plan.

   Thanks to the elaborate distraction staged by the Argentine
forces, a special commando team got onto the Island undetected. 
Based on the detailed Rockefeller information about the base, the
team moved to a location on the mountain directly above the
cavernous secret base.  Special high-speed drilling equipment was
set up by the Rockefeller members of the team while the Russian
members concentrated on military defense.  By late that evening,
April 3, the military high command in London finally learned what
was really taking place.  The secret South Georgia base was under
attack by virtually the only means possible.  The joint
Rockefeller-Russian team were drilling a shaft down through the
mountain toward the hollowed out cavern inside.  It was only a
matter of time until their drill would break through the ceiling
of the giant hidden naval base.  Once the hole was made, the next
step was obvious.  The Rockefeller-Russian team would put a
weapon of some kind through the hole.  The best guess was that it
would be a nerve gas.

   The shock waves that went through the highest levels of the
British government on the evening of April 3 can hardly be
described, my friends.  The Thatcher government, like the
so-called Reagan Administration here in America, is Bolshevik
controlled.  That's why Margaret Thatcher always says, "Me, too"
any time the Reagan Administration says or does anything against
Russia.  Both governments are party to the secret nuclear war
plan in complete betrayal of the people of their respective
countries, and on the evening of April 3 they suddenly discovered
that their precious war plan was in deep, deep trouble.

   Immediately the Thatcher government started assembling a naval
armada to sail for the South Atlantic.  Haste was the order of
the day.  The drilling on South Georgia Island was proceeding
around the clock.  The best estimates were that the drilling
would break through into the roof of the naval base in about
three weeks, on or about April 24.  If help did not reach South
Georgia by then, the secret installation might be doomed.  The
forces stationed at the installation itself were unable to defend
themselves under the circumstances.  Their mighty naval ships
were ships in a bottle.  They did not dare open the bottle to
sail out to fight because the Russian commandos were armed with
tactical and nuclear weapons.  To open the blast-proof entrance
doors would be suicide.

   On April 5, just two days after South Georgia Island was
seized, some 40 naval ships began moving out of British ports. 
The same day Lord Carrington was sacked as Foreign Minister.  He
was forced to resign, my friends, because he had assisted the
Rockefeller attack plan by downplaying the Argentine attack
preparations.

   That same day, April 5, New Zealand, the home of the other
secret naval fleet, broke diplomatic relations with Argentina. 
The two hidden New Zealand facilities had been placed on "Red
Alert."  As a precautionary measure, all submarines at the twin
base were ordered to sea.  Several surface ships were already at
sea undergoing "sea trials", but that still left seven (7) major
ships inside the hidden twin naval base including one of the
nuclear aircraft carriers I mentioned earlier.

   On that busy day of April 5, Argentina's Foreign Minister,
Costa Mendez, was at the United Nations in New York.  He was
alarmed by the deployment of such a large part of the Royal Navy. 
Costa Mendez hurried here to Washington to seek reassurances from
certain officials.  He got them!

   For the next two weeks or so the news was filled with stories
about the allegedly slow movement of the British fleet while
negotiations went on.  That, my friends, was only a cover story. 
The Royal Navy was actually joining up and moving as rapidly as
possible toward South Georgia Island.  If the task force arrived
in time to save the secret base, a major battle was likely.  The
official stories about "slow movement" of the British armada were
intended to give a cushion of time for that battle.  If need be,
the fleet would have several days to retake South Georgia Island,
then it could move on to arrive near the Falklands on the
announced schedule.  In this way the crucial importance of South
Georgia Island would be hidden and the big secret preserved.

   It was initially expected that advance elements of the British
fleet would reach the vicinity of South Georgia Island within two
weeks.  That would have been soon enough to attack the joint
Rockefeller-Russian commando team and stop the drilling before it
was completed.  But Russian Cosmospheres and submarines made a
shambles of the plan.

   Key advance elements of the South Georgia attack contingent
left Ascension Island early April 14, two days before it was
announced officially.  Shortly after they did so, they ran into
trouble.  Russian Cosmospheres and attack submarines closed in on
a single ship which was critical to the planned counterassault on
South Georgia Island.  The Cosmospheres bombarded the bridge and
combat information center of the ship with neutron radiation.  In
moments the ship was without any command, its communications and
radar silenced.  Then a Russian "sub" closed in and quickly
finished off this key British ship with torpedoes.  It broke
apart with secondary explosions and sank rapidly.  So far as is
known, there were no survivors.

   This unexpected shock in the mid-Atlantic produced two
results, both important:

First, it caused a slowdown in the race toward the South Atlantic
by the British armada.  The task force had to be regrouped into a
configuration better suited for an enroute defense, but that cost
valuable time.  Public announcements from London about the
progress of the fleet reflected this slowdown.  The timetable for
arrival on battle stations near the Falklands started stretching
out longer and longer.  All this bought extra time for the joint
commando team on South Georgia Island.  The drilling continued.

The other result of the sinking was equally important.  Word was
flashed to the South Pacific Stealth navy to prepare for possible
action.  It was obvious that the Russian Navy was getting
involved in the Atlantic, which meant that the Royal Navy could
be in big trouble.  During the dead of night, early April 15, the
seven Stealth ships put to sea from their twin secret bases in
southern New Zealand.  They deployed to a secret operational
headquarters area in the Antipodes Islands, 450 miles southeast
of New Zealand.  Their electromagnetic shields were operating to
provide protection from attack.  These shields make it impossible
to communicate with the outside world or even to see it, as I
explained last month; but once they arrived at the Antipodes, the
Stealth ships hooked up to buoys equipped with shielded
communication cables to the Island headquarters.  The Antipodes
headquarters, in turn, was in constant touch with the South
Georgia base by way of a transoceanic cable around the tip of
South America.  The deployment of the available ships of the
South Pacific Stealth fleet was exactly what the joint
Rockefeller-Russian planners had hoped for.  The ships had been
flushed out from their essentially invulnerable hiding place in
New Zealand!

   The British ship's sinking of April 14 was also followed by
other events.  On April 15 the Argentine Navy started moving out
of port.  The same day, Alexander Haig arrived again in Buenos
Aires.  Supposedly he was there as a diplomat, but in reality he
was there as a General, dealing with Generals.  Haig is the top
Governmental operative of the Rockefeller cartel, as I have
revealed in the past.  He was making sure that the Argentines did
not get cold feet and back down at that critical moment.  Four
days later, April 19, Haig left for Washington.  As he boarded
his plane, Haig somberly told reporters, "Time is running out." 
And so it was, my friends, for the secret South Georgia base.

   The very next day, April 20, the drill broke through into the
hollowed-out cavern of the naval base.  Bolshevik military
analysts in London had not expected that it could be completed
until at least the following weekend.  The British fleet was
still out of range.

   The weapon which the commando team inserted down through the
long hole was a small, compact Russian neutron bomb.  When it was
detonated inside the confines of the huge artificial cave, the
effects were devastating.  The intense radiation instantly killed
everyone inside the base.  Also the heat and blast effects of the
bomb are believed to have damaged all the ships inside
sufficiently to badly disable them.

   Meanwhile, Russian Cosmospheres and submarines were converging
on the Stealth ships which were near the Antipodes Islands
awaiting orders.  From a distance, the ships were invisible to
the eye due to their protective shields, which also protect
against beam-weapon attack; but they were sitting ducks for the
tactics which the Russians employed.

   Floating overhead, the Cosmospheres located the seven ships
using their Psychoenergetic Range-Finding equipment known as PRF. 
As I have reported in the past, there is no method known by which
PRF can be jammed.  The Cosmospheres radioed the exact locations
of the ships to the attack submarines.  The "subs" were armed
with special non-homing, non-nuclear torpedoes designed to
explode on impact.  More sophisticated torpedoes would have been
thrown off course or detonated prematurely by the protective
shield of each ship; but these simple torpedoes just cruise right
through each invisibility field to strike the ship and explode. 
Within 15 minutes after the attack began, all seven Bolshevik
Stealth ships were on their way to the bottom, and with them went
their Bolshevik Commanders and mercenary crews collected from
around the world.

   The South Pacific action took place just after sunset local
time.  The time here in Washington was around 2:00 P.M. April 23. 
That evening Secretary of State Haig was seen briefly in public
with the new British Foreign Minister, Francis Pym.  Pym was
wearing the artificial pseudo-smile which diplomats are taught
always to display in public.  But not Haig.  Haig was grinning
from ear to ear, and no wonder.  The joint Rockefeller-Russian
military operation had been a brilliant success.  The secret
Bolshevik South Atlantic fleet had been virtually wiped out,
bottled up inside South Georgia Island; and the South Pacific
fleet, while not totally wiped out, had been badly crippled.  By
working together, the Rockefeller cartel and the Russians had won
the secret naval war of the Southern Hemisphere.

Topic #3--As I say these words, news reports give the impression
that war is about to erupt in the South Atlantic, but the real
war in the Southern Hemisphere is already over.  What we are
watching now is the beginning of its bloody aftermath.  That
aftermath is the battle for the Falkland Islands.  They have been
promised to Argentina as a reward for her role in the secret war.

   At this moment the Bolsheviks here in Washington are pressing
for a public announcement that the United States will side with
Britain.  As soon as that takes place, military action will heat
up fast around the Falklands.  Britain has no choice but to
fight.  She has already suffered casualties which cannot be
explained without a public battle; but by fighting, the
Bolsheviks in Britain are running the risk of a humiliating and
tragic defeat for the Royal Navy.

   Meanwhile, the Rockefeller strategists here are now
concentrating on a fast-building, anti-nuclear-war campaign.  On
all sides now we are hearing about the so-called "nuclear freeze
movement."  There are documentaries, articles, publicity of all
kinds to sensitize us to the terrors of nuclear war.  In recent
months, there have even been referenda popping up on election
ballots dealing with the nuclear war issue.  Medical doctors are
banding together to warn the public about what would happen if
there were a nuclear war.

   We are being told that all this is just popping up
spontaneously.  We are now 37 years into the nuclear age and
nothing like this has ever gained so much momentum before, yet
now we are supposed to believe that millions of Americans have
spontaneously gotten the same ideas at the same time.  If you
believe that, my friends, I give up.  Movements like this never,
and I mean never, develop without leadership, organization, and
money--and plenty of it.

   What we are watching is the Rockefeller public relations
machine at work.  As I've explained in the past, the Rockefeller
cartel cannot afford to let a nuclear war take place.  If it
does, they will lose everything because they are not in a
position to control it.  Instead, the deadly enemies of the
Rockefeller cartel, the Bolsheviks here, will win out if there is
a war; and so the Rockefeller faction is now doing everything in
its power to prevent a nuclear war.

   The present anti-nuclear-war orientation of the Rockefeller
cartel creates certain temporary common interests between them
and Russia; but as Russia's new rulers know very well, this does
not spring from any great moral perspective on the part of the
Rockefeller group.  It's purely a matter of practical necessity
right now for the Rockefellers.

   The Russians regard the United States as a house divided, and
they are exploiting that division by working in careful ways with
the Rockefellers.  Their first priority is to rid the world of
the deadly Bolshevik menace of all-out, even suicidal, nuclear
war; but once that is done, they know that there will be a day of
reckoning with the Rockefeller cartel some day.

   The Rockefeller group is working toward a definite objective
with their new anti-nuclear-war propaganda.  That objective is
renewed power--and power that moves them closer to their old
dream of WORLD GOVERNMENT.  The Bolsheviks here have unwittingly
provided fertile ground for the powerful new Rockefeller antiwar
campaign.  Under Bolshevik control, the so-called Reagan
Administration has become so hawkish that it's scaring people. 
The Rockefeller antiwar campaign is designed to capitalize on
that latent fear as a tool of power.

   These days the smell of war is in the air.  The Falklands
crisis is helping to make that more intense.  The Rockefeller
propaganda machine is now paving the way for the argument that
surrender of sovereignty is the only way to avoid war.  A new
super-United Nations of sorts is now in the works to fill the
bill.  It will have teeth!  As presently envisioned, the new
organization will be based in Geneva, Switzerland.  The working
name, though this may be changed, is the "World Nonproliferation
Council."  The plan is to bring it into being as the outgrowth of
nuclear nonproliferation treaties, but its true purpose will be
to use fear--the fear of war--to control us all.

                       LAST MINUTE SUMMARY

   Now it's time for my Last Minute Summary.  In this AUDIO
LETTER I have reported on the reasons behind the so-called
Falkland Islands crisis.  The crisis erupted because of secret
Bolshevik-controlled naval installations in the Southern
Hemisphere.  These have been attacked by joint action of the
Rockefeller cartel and the Russians in an attempt to slow down
the nuclear-war timetable.  The attacks were successful, but the
results remain to be seen.  One result, though, is that the Royal
Navy has now been drawn into a trap.  Britain's Waterloo at sea
may well be at hand.

   My friends, two factions are struggling for control over our
United States--the Rockefeller cartel and the Bolsheviks.  They
differ in style but both seek to control us through fear.  If we
are ever to rise above their trickery, it must be through the
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, our only hope.  As the Scripture
tells us, our Lord "...has not given us the spirit of fear; but
of power, of love, and of a sound mind."  We must learn to wage
peace.  As our Lord declared long ago, "Blessed are the
peacemakers: for they shall be called sons of God."

   Until next month, God willing, this is Dr. Beter.  Thank you,
and may God bless each and every one of you.
