Newsgroups: talk.politics.guns
Path: cantaloupe.srv.cs.cmu.edu!magnesium.club.cc.cmu.edu!news.sei.cmu.edu!cis.ohio-state.edu!pacific.mps.ohio-state.edu!zaphod.mps.ohio-state.edu!uwm.edu!linac!att!cbnews!lvc
From: lvc@cbnews.cb.att.com (Larry Cipriani)
Subject: Gun Talk -- State legislative update
Organization: Ideology Busters, Inc.
Distribution: usa
Date: Tue, 20 Apr 1993 15:31:09 GMT
Message-ID: <C5sGG3.Bnv@cbnews.cb.att.com>
Keywords: Gun Talk
Lines: 208

April 19, 1993
 
As William O. Douglas noted, "If a powerful sponsor is lacking,
individual liberty withers -- in spite of glowing opinions and
resounding constitutional phrases."
 
The legislative scorecard outlined below resulted from subcommittee,
committee, and floor action.  Many important victories, however, come
from coordinating with legislators to ensure anti-gun/anti-hunting
legislation is either amended favorably, rejected, or never voted.
These quiet victories are no less impressive in protecting our
fundamental civil liberties guaranteed by the Second Amendment to the
U.S. Constitution.
 
  ****
 
Arizona - SB 1233, NRA-supported legislation concerning minors in
criminal possession of firearms  passed the House 36-18, is currently
awaiting action by the Governor.
 
Arkansas - HB 1447, Firearms Preemption Legislation was signed by the
Governor making this the forty-first state to pass preemption.
Preemption had passed twice in previous sessions only to be vetoed by
then Gov. Bill Clinton.  HB 1417, mandatory storage of firearms,
amended and then killed in committee.
 
Colorado - SB 42, mandating the storage of firearms with a
trigger-lock, killed in committee.  SB 104,  prohibiting the sale of
certain semi-auto firearms was killed in committee.  SB 108,
so-called Colorado Handgun Violence Prevention Act, including a
provision for a 10-day waiting period, killed in committee.
 
Connecticut - Substitute Bill No. 6372, imposing a 6% tax on all
firearms, ammunition, and archery equipment killed in Environment
Committee.
 
Florida - A bill to require a 3-year license at a cost of $150 to own
or possess semi-automatic firearms with a second degree felony
provision (15 years in prison) died in committee along with numerous
other anti-gun owner bills.  No anti-gun legislation passed in
Florida this year.
 
Georgia - SB 12, supposed instant check with provision allowing for
up to a 7-day "waiting period,"  defeated in House Public Safety
Committee and sent to Interim Study committee.  Mandatory storage
bill -- SB 247 -- was defeated 39-15 in the Senate.  The same bill
passed the upper-House 52-2 in 1992.
 
 
Illinois - HB 90, prohibiting the sale, possession, manufacture,
purchase, possession, or carrying of certain semi-auto firearms, was
defeated in House Judiciary II Subcommittee on Firearms. HB 91,
mandatory storage legislation, failed in House Judiciary Subcommittee
on Firearms. HB 1550, repeals FOID and makes FTIP, point of sale
check permanent, passed out of Judiciary Committee by a 10-4-2 vote.
Presently on the calendar for third reading in the House.
 
SB 40, mandatory storage bill, defeated in committee.
SB 265, imposing a handgun excise tax, failed in Senate committee on
Revenue's Subcommittee on Tax Increases.
SB 272,imposing a tax on all persons engaged in the business of
selling firearms, failed in Senate Revenue Committee's Subcommittee
on Tax Increases.
 
Indiana - SB 241, Statewide Firearms Preemption, passed in the Senate
34-16, and in the House 77-22.  Twelve amendments were introduced on
the House floor to SB 241.  Among these amendments were a ban on
certain semi-auto firearms, Mandatory Storage, Trigger-Lock, a ban on
"Saturday Night Specials" (Similar to 1988 Maryland Bill), and
Handgun Rationing (one handgun per month).  All were defeated.

	[I read this morning (4/20) S.B. 241 was defeated -- lvc]
 
Kansas - HB 2435, providing for a 72-hour waiting period on all
firearms was defeated in committee.  HB 2458, presently on the
Governor's desk, HB 2459 and SB 243 and 266 all relating to victims'
rights, are expected to be enacted into law.
 
Maine - Funding for the Department of Fish and Wildlife 1993-94
budget, was restored following severe  reductions in the Governor's
proposed budget.  LD 612, an anti-hunting bill which included reverse
posting and 1000 yard safety zones, killed in committee.
 
Maryland - SB 6-(Firearms Incendiary ammunition) died in committee on
a 8-3 vote, SB 41 (Reckless  Endangerment - Firearms - Sale or
Transfer) died in committee on a 11-0 vote, SB 126 (Gun Control -
"Assault Weapons") died in committee on 9-2 vote, SB 182 (Weapons
-Free School Zone) was withdrawn, SB 185 (Weapons on School Property-
Driver's License Suspension was withdrawn, SB 265 ("Assault Pistols"
- Sale, Purchase or Transport) died in committee on 8-3 vote, SB 328
("Assault Pistols" Act of 1993) died in committee on a 8-3 vote, SB
682 (Baltimore City-Firearms-Rifles and Shotguns) died in committee
on a 9-2 vote.
 
HB 274 (Pistol and Revolver Dealers Licenses - compliance with zoning
laws) was withdrawn, HB 366 (Regulated Firearms-sales and transfer)
died on the Senate Floor, HB 374 (Handguns and "assault weapons" -
Advertising for sale or transfer) died in committee, HB 384 (Handguns
and "Assault Weapons" - Exhibitors) died in committee, HB 495
("Assault Pistols" Act of 1993) died in committee on a 14-9 vote, HB
496 (Gun Shows-Sale, Trade, or Transfer of regulated firearms) died
in committee on a 19-6 vote, HB 601 (Firearms - Handguns - "Assault
Pistols" - Handgun Roster Board) was withdrawn, HB 683 (Rifles and
Shotguns - Registration) was withdrawn, HB 945 (Pistols and Revolvers
- Private sales  or transfers- required notice) died in committee,
and HB 1128 Prince Georges County -
 Weapons - Free School Zone) was withdrawn.
 
Mississippi - HB 141, closing a loophole allowing felons to possess
firearms, passed both Houses and signed by the Governor.  The bill
codifies into law mechanism for certain felons to have their Second
Amendment liberties reinstated.
 
Nebraska - LB 83 and LB 225, mandatory trigger-lock bills, killed in
committee.
 
New Hampshire - H.B. 363, providing for reciprocity for concealed
carry licenses passed.  H.B. 671,  increasing the term of a License
to Carry Loaded Handguns passed.
 
New Mexico - SB 762, imposing a 7-day "waiting period," defeated in
Senate committee (0-5) and then on  floor of the Senate (15-24).  HB
182, mandatory storage legislation, was killed by a vote of 1-8 in
committee.  HB 230, legislation safeguarding sportsmen in the field
from harassment by animal rights extremists, signed into law by the
Governor on March 30.
 
New York - Seven-day waiting period was defeated in the City of
Buffalo.   Ban on certain semi-autos was defeated in Monroe County.
The tax and fee bills to be imposed on guns and ammo were not
included in the 1993-94 budget. SB 207, making pistol licenses
provides for validity of pistol license throughout the state, passed
Senate.  Currently awaiting action in Assembly committee.
 
North Dakota - HB 1484, granting victims compensation in certain
circumstances, was signed into law by the Governor on April 8.
 
Oregon - SB 334, banning firearms on school grounds and in court
buildings, withdrawn as a result of gun owners opposition.
 
Rhode Island - HB 5273, mandatory firearms storage legislation,
defeated in committee by a vote of 8-5. HB 6347, an act prohibiting
aliens from owning firearm; defeated by unanimous vote in committee.
HB 5650, excepting NRA instructors from the firearms safety
requirement, reported favorably. HB 5781, exempting persons with an
Attorney General's permit from the 7-day waiting period, reported to
the floor by a vote of 11-1.
HB 6917, extending the term of a permit to carry from two years to
three years, reported to the floor unanimously.
 
Utah   HB 290, reforming the state's concealed carry statute, passed
out of House committee.  SB 32, creating civil liability for
so-called negligent storage of a firearm, and SB 33 creating the
offense of "reckless endangerment" with a firearm, killed on Senate
floor.
 
Virginia: S.B. 336, and S.B. 803, requiring proof of state residence
to obtain Virginia Driver's License passed.  S.B. 804, which
increases the penalty and imposes a mandatory minimum sentence for
"straw man" purchases of multiple firearms passed.  S.B. 858,
allowing possession of "sawed-off" rifles and shotguns in compliance
with federal law passed.  S.B. 1054, making it a felony for first
offense of carrying a concealed firearm without a license (which the
NRA opposes until law-abiding citizens can acquire a concealed carry
license for self-defense), was defeated. H.B. 1900, increasing the
penalty for use of a firearm in committing a felony was passed.  H.B.
2076, requiring proof of residence to obtain a driver's license
passed.  H.B. 2272, providing for a referendum on the imposition of a
statewide three- day "waiting period" in handgun purchases was
defeated.
 
Washington: SB 5160, calling for waiting periods and licensing for
all semi-automatic firearms, died  in committee.
 
West Virginia - S.C.R. 18, which calls for a study to control
transfers of handguns and "Assault Weapons" was defeated in the
Senate 24-10.
 
Wisconsin - In a referendum up against all odds, the determined
efforts of the Madison Area Citizens Against Crime paid off on April
6 when a nonbinding referendum banning the possession of handguns in
Madison, Wisconsin, was defeated.  Despite opposition to the ban --
aired largely by firearms owners at a series of public meetings on
the issue -- the Common Council voted on February 17 to place the
referendum on the ballot, allowing only seven weeks of campaigning to
reverse public opinion on the controversial issue.
 
An October 1992 poll conducted by the Wisconsin State Journal found
57% in support and 38% opposed, with 5% expressing no opinion.  By
election day, of the more than 56,000 voters who went to the polls,
51% cast ballots in opposition to the proposal while 49% voted to
have the Madison Common Council enact such a ban.  The campaign
committee, spearheaded by the Wisconsin Pro-Gun Movement and NRA-ILA,
relied on neighborhood canvassing, direct mail and radio/TV
advertising to educate voters on the civil liberties implications
raised by enforcement of the ban if the referendum was approved.
 
Despite the surprising defeat, it is expected that the Madison
initiative's chief proponent, Mayor Paul Soglin, will attempt to have
the Common Council enact an ordinance banning handguns.
 
                Downloaded from GUN-TALK (703-719-6406)
                A service of the
                National Rifle Association
                Institute for Legislative Action
                Washington, DC 20036
-- 
Larry Cipriani -- l.v.cipriani@att.com
